if you were choosing a house and one was
open plan had picturesque views 57
million square miles of land five oceans
a breathable atmosphere and meerkats and
the other house was a barren hellscape
with poisonous soil a poisonous
atmosphere a constant barrage of deadly
cosmic radiation and zero mere cats
i mean you'd pick the nice one right
because you spent millions of years
evolving to live there and there's land
galore and plenty of resources and if
you treat it properly it could be a
veritable paradise with humans and
nature living in perfect heart where the
[ __ ] are you going
but if you really insist on visiting
mars then we'll have to get there so
spacey school first where you'll be
treated to a variety of psychologists in
your brain and a variety of cameras up
your ass then a ride up through the
atmosphere on a barely controlled
explosion bomb voyage
off we go then unless your spaceship
uses spinny sci-fi rings welcome to zero
gravity meaning you can now look forward
to space adaptation syndrome or science
your precious bodily fluids will now
redistribute and puff your head up your
lunch will probably pop out of your
tummy for a second viewing your spine
will now begin to stretch out by a few
centimeters let's see how that goes when
you get back to gravity and maybe
debilitating kidney stones from your
bones losing calcium and cancerous
radiation from cosmic rays we are not
made for space on average mars is about
142 million miles from earth but every
26 months it gets close enough for
humans to pop across traveling with
current tech that'll probably take
around seven months and during that time
all of your food will be eaten from bags
no booze obviously and let's just hope
you like drinking recycled pierce as the
nasa motto goes today's coffee is
tomorrow's coffee but that's not all
because confinement you now inescapably
share a double decker bus with a bunch
of potentially highly irritating humans
for the next seven months on top of that
all you have to look out the window at
is little oodle doodles on a black
background interspersed with occasional
breaks for a nice cup of piss java on
top of that medical problems dental
issues unexpected space pregnancy the
nearest hospital is millions of miles
back the way you came but assuming
you've avoided technical failure
psychological failure deadly
micrometeoroids hopefully you've made it
to mars pick a nice spot for landing and
prepare for 10 minutes of terror even
though the atmosphere of mars is about
100 times less dense than earth's that
means it's enough to burn stuff up but
not thick enough to make parachutes very
effective you'll need some variation of
an aeroshell to protect the spacecraft
booty a parachute to slow things down a
bit and probably retro rockets to get to
the surface undead and if you still
haven't gone mad sad or irradiated and
you sat down alright best of luck
standing up you've just got used to zero
gravity and now gravity is back the
world will go 10 tequila shots wibbly
with your eyes fighting your vestibular
system your body thinks it's been
poisoned vertigo and horrific nausea
could go on for weeks but if you can
power through snap a blueprint on the
martian surface for us idiots back home
10 points to gryffindor humanity has
gone interplanetary that's one small
step for a suicidal astronaut one giant
leap for whoever happens to be into big
barren balls of sweet
[ __ ] all
because that's where you are now
great you've made the history books but
that ain't gonna keep you alive now
maybe some robots went ahead of you and
got a little crib ready maybe not but
either way you'll need your own
breathable air because mars don't have
that mars's atmosphere is 95 carbon
dioxide that's the stuff we breathe out
not in three percent nitrogen or plant
food you are not a plant and two percent
ago argon now maybe you can make oxygen
from carbon dioxide using a process
called electrolysis but that is going to
take lots of power and unless you
brought a nuclear reactor with you or
something good luck anyway duties of
yours will probably include scouting the
area for prime real estate for those who
come after you a spot of geology
geography and trying not to die and get
a load of your new hood the tallest
volcano in the solar system olympus mons
the largest canyon in the solar system
valles marineris and hope your beach
body is ready because maximum
temperature is 30 degrees celsius hope
your beach coffin is ready because
minimum is -140
a mars day is only 37 minutes longer
than ours there'll also be four seasons
just like earth and feel free to step
outside and die in any of them oh watch
out for dust storms they can get 20
miles high and spread across the entire
planet for months on end the greeks
called mars's two moons fear and panic
and there's a reason for that
now we think there's still frozen water
on mars maybe liquid water deep under
the surface hopefully you found some of
that and hopefully it isn't full of
deadly lurking pathogens talking of
which old martian water might mean old
martian life and how exciting if you
found some of that possibly yeah
possibly [ __ ] no because if the remains
of life are found there's two
possibilities either we confirm that
it's an ancient ancestor of earth life
meaning somehow we swapped microbes with
mars ages ago and we're all descended
from the same stuff interesting for sure
or there's no connection to earth
meaning it's really real alien life and
one massive thing we don't know about
the universe is how common is life just
arising in the first place well if the
remains of alien life even microbes are
found on mars that means life began
independently on two out of eight
planets in our solar system alone or one
in four pretty good odds and if we apply
those odds to the rest of the universe
there are probably at least thousands of
earth-like planets in our galaxy alone
billions considering all the other
galaxies and that's nice and that's
swell but if life is so common where is
everyone then where is anyone well maybe
alien life doesn't evolve into complex
organisms very often or maybe it does
but civilizations wipe themselves out
with some technology waiting for us a
few hundred years into our own future or
maybe someone is meticulously wiping
them out something to rustle the
existential jimmies in any case still
your launch window will come around in a
few months off your trot the next lot of
human parasites to arrive might start
thinking about actually sticking around
for a while as in permanent digs and for
them radiation will be a big issue
courtesy of the sun and cosmic rays all
things being equal humans on mars would
receive 50 times as much radiation as
they would living on earth lava tubes
could be an idea they're underground
that'll help there might be some decent
ones at a spot called halas planeta for
example and if humans can seal a section
off and pressurize it and with the help
of a nuclear reactor oxygen extraction
from the atmosphere etc yeah maybe
alternately mars is covered in crushed
rock regolith everywhere we don't know
yet if you can make durable concrete
from the stuff would be neat for
building with but again radiation so
some kind of protective shell would be
needed if humans are living up top and
covering everything in a layer of
regolith might do the trick for
shielding solar and cosmic nasties in
any case underground overground wombling
free if humans can find enough power
water and protection from radiation it
won't be pretty living but maybe for
whatever god forsaken reason anyone
would live on mars it could be home
[Music]
now making babies on mars will not be a
problem there's enough gravity for that
having babies though
god knows what happens to a developing
fetus on mars if conception is even
possible but this is all made up anyway
so assuming radiation hasn't damaged the
mum or child during gestation
congratulations it's a martian the first
one ever and just by being born he or
she will perhaps instantly become one of
the most famous humans ever to exist
talk about peaking early now mars is
unlikely to be a state by then so if
maritime law applies he or she will
probably inherit the citizenship of
their parents all the same the first
ever native martian will no doubt be
adorable in that irritating baby way
tiny feetsies tiny hands but with bones
and a heart that will develop in martian
gravity just 38
of earth's they may never be able to
visit earth not without some miraculous
technology our gravity will be
exhausting possibly fatal but if you're
of a certain age you know what happens
when one of your mates has a baby
suddenly everyone wants one resource
permitting here come more little
martians then living effectively in a
submarine is all they will know and
they'll be told stories of course of
another planet just over there somewhere
with oceans and zebras and skyscrapers
all beneath a benevolent blue sky this
will also probably signal a change in
the colony from survivalists to
homesteaders they need teachers now and
pediatricians and pharmacologists to
cook up whatever brand of liquid
morphine it is that stops new parents
going [ __ ] postal they're
generational they're a proper settlement
and hopefully with enough fertilizer and
detoxification martian soil can support
a crop yield to foster a growing
population who knows and what do
martians do all day anyway why would
earth have funded a martian operation
for so long it really depends on what we
find there if rare resources are
abundant mining and export could be an
option mars has less than half the
gravity of earth and if rocket fuel can
be made in abundance interplanetary
logistics mars to earth would be way
cheaper than the other way around
asteroid mining also wouldn't be the
worst idea if we're going all sci-fi
between jupiter and mars is our solar
system's main asteroid belt it's only
about four percent the mass of earth's
moon but full of iron and nickel cobalt
vibranium billions and billions of
dollars worth of materials and
considering mars is closer and again
easier to launch stuff into orbit from
could be the basis of an economy maybe
but whatever happens next really depends
on whether martians can achieve energy
independence from earth if they're
forever relying on us for isotopes or
materials they'll forever be a satellite
of the mother planet if they don't have
to though that would be interesting
because they're 20 minutes away by radio
and months away by rocket and if you
leave isolated settlers in one place
they do what humans always do culture
inventing new dialects new traditions
and with that a sense of independent
martian solidarity they probably have
their own flag and catchy anthems about
how mars is best this planet perhaps
they'll start having little chats
amongst themselves about how they're
getting bored with the earth supervision
thing but we know what happens when a
distant state or multinational has an
isolated group of people just where it
wants them and the issue of independence
gets raised the reply from corporate
usually goes something like listen you
just keep doing or producing or
exporting whatever it is of yours we
like so much and in return you'll be
more than fairly compensated with a tea
break once a year and pitifully small
payment if any at all and even more
brutal working conditions and if you
don't like it feel free to eat that big
bag of dicks over there and every now
and then if sufficiently irate perhaps
these isolated people respond thanks
that sounds great small digression
though about the tea it's lovely with
lemon but yeah we prefer it in the
boston harbour yeah [ __ ] 15 bucks
little man pay us fair and insert your
resolute trading company right up your
fundament we want meerkats and passports
and [ __ ] loads of meerkats we'll found
our own martian government with our own
parliamentary shouty people and
everything and we'll do democracy better
we'll do brutality better we'll [ __ ]
everything up better than you ever could
no one's had a bath in three generations
so take your quarterly reports and your
taxation without representation and [ __ ]
right off yep ocean hogging atmosphere
breathing cuts
they grow up so fast
[Music]
about three billion years ago when the
human race was a mere twinkle in
darwin's eye it's likely that mars had
an ocean over time the planetary core
cooled and the great magnet at the heart
of the world shut down and without a
magnetic field for protection solar
winds began to attack stripping away the
atmosphere while the water below was
evaporated as life flourished next door
for 3000 million years but if we make
the trip there sometime soon though the
first settlers to mars may arrive in
hell they would surely prefer eden can
we do that can we bring a planet back
from the dead
well no probably not us we're barely
managing the house we grew up in but our
kids kids kids might give it a go if the
technology is there for starters they
would need to recreate mars's long dead
magnetic field its magnetosphere and one
fun and pleasantly insane idea for this
is engineering a taurus or donut of
plasma around the planet by firing off
particles from phobos mars's larger moon
but this stuff is all probably science
for later this century or the next and
even with magnetic shielding the
atmosphere is thinner than airline
toilet paper and too chilly for humans
anyway well a bit of global warming then
co2 and cfcs are terrible for our
atmosphere but released into mars
atmosphere by the kiloton would be one
way to thicken and warm things up but
even then if the air is nice and toasty
we still can't breathe it cyanobacteria
gifted earth with oxygen via
photosynthesis but that took millions
and millions of years even if
cyanobacteria is capable of living on
mars or genetically engineered algae or
something making mars air breathable
with photosynthesis is likely to take
centuries if not a millennium if not
longer though if it's possible perhaps
as back on earth we grimly mark the
successive milestones of environmental
decline our martian cousins will watch
their world for the opposite
the first cloud the first reigns the
first blade of grass and anthill the
first lover's picnic outside the first
martian generation to consider
themselves not as stalwart settlers but
earth's equals full terraforming may
just not be possible some areas of
science are dead ends there's a reason
alchemy jobs are so hard to come by
these days but from our current vantage
point in history there is a case for the
possibility of resurrecting mars and
wherever else humans of the solar system
go whatever else we turn into however
much better or worse human existence
becomes with any kind of permanent
self-sufficient settlement on mars a
single delicate cell of planetary
civilization will have divided in two
with the terrible burden of cosmic
survival carried on two backs now making
the weight lighter for both
there's a good bit near the end of the
movie 2010 when the story is almost
wrapped up and non-corporeal omnipotent
aliens deign to communicate with
humanity just once a message addressed
to all of us
and paraphrased the message reads
all these worlds are yours
use them together
use them
in peace
hi thanks for staying until the bitter
end i wrote a story a while ago called
geometry for ocelots and just a mere
year after the ebook came out it's a
paperback now too there's a link below
if you want to get hold of the paperback
there's a link below if you don't it
works equally well as a doorstop a
beverage mat and perhaps a tarpaulin for
any itinerant mice passing through your
premises it's a thousand-year long war
between a religious empire and a
scientific empire really but with
buddhism and transhumanism along for the
ride sorry it took a while to get into
prince but of all the stories i've
written this is
one of them anyway i hope you enjoy it i
hope you're keeping well i hope your gut
bacteria are in good health i hope you
recently enjoyed a game of backgammon i
hope you're on the verge of emerging
from a personal crisis i hope the air
temperature is optimal wherever you
happen to be on the planet i hope you
found your purpose in life i hope you've
worked out what was in the briefcase in
pulp fiction i hope you recently
encountered a cat